---
layout: post
title: (Auto)biography of Khnumhotep II, lines 1-13, from the tomb of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan
permalink: /gallery/07a/
tag: Khnumhotep-II
---

## Location

Egypt, Beni Hassan, Upper Cemetery. Tomb of Khnumhotep II (Tomb 3). Chapel. Inscription: East wall, Lower section.

## Description

The (auto)biography of Khnumhotep II is incised on sunk relief below the coloured dado on the lower part of all four walls of the chapel. The (auto)biography begins on the east wall, north of the shrine and runs anti-clockwise, ending on the east wall, south of the shrine. On the south wall between lines 160 and 161 is a small false door carved in bas-relief. The inscription reads:

(1-3) *jrj-pꜤt ḥꜢtj-Ꜥ rḫ nswt mrrw nṯr.f jmj-r smjwt jꜢbt(jw)t Nḥrj sꜢ H̱nmw-ḥtp(.w) mꜢꜤ-ḫrw jr n sꜢt ḥꜢtj-Ꜥ nbt-pr BꜢḳt mꜢꜤ(t)-ḫrw* 'The hereditary prince, the count, the acquaintance of the king, the beloved of his god, the overseer of the eastern deserts, Nehri's son, Khnumhotep, the justified, born to the daughter of the count, the lady of the house, Baqet, the justified'.

(4-13) *jr.n.f m mnw.f sp.f tpj m smnḫ njwt.f srwḏ.f rn.f n nḥḥ smnḫ.f sw n ḏt m js.f n ẖrt-nṯr srwḏ.f rn n ḳnbt.f smnḫ(.w) ḫft jꜢ(w)t.sn mnḫw jmjw-nw prw.f ṯn.n.f ḫnt mrt.f jꜢt nbt ḫrpt.n.f ḥmwt nbt mj ḫpr.s rꜢ.f ḏd.f* 'He has made (it) as his monument. His first act was embellishing his city that he might cause his name to flourish eternally, that he might distinguish it forever in his tomb of the necropolis. He strengthened the name of his council, (they) being advanced according to their offices, and the trusty ones among his household, whom he has distinguished ahead of his servants; every office which he has directed and every corps of craftsmen according to its nature, its mouth says':-

## Photograph

<amp-iframe width="600" height="600"
sandbox="allow-scripts allow-presentation allow-popups allow-modals"
layout="responsive"
frameborder="0"
src="https://faims.github.io/tiles/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-07a-Beni-Hassan-Khnumhotep-II-Tomb-3-Chapel-Inscription-East-wall-Lower-section-Wall.html"
>
</amp-iframe>

## Line Art

<amp-iframe width="600" height="600"
sandbox="allow-scripts allow-presentation allow-popups allow-modals"
layout="responsive"
frameborder="0"
src="https://faims.github.io/tiles/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-110a-Beni-Hassan-Khnumhotep-II-Tomb-3-Chapel-Inscription-East-wall-Lower-section-WallfromKanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-07a.html"
>
</amp-iframe>

## Hieroglpyhics

<amp-img width=406 height=194 layout="responsive" src="/assets/images/MQ.KEBH1.07a.svg"></amp-img>

<hr/>

## Details

*Title:* (Auto)biography of Khnumhotep II, lines 1-13, from the tomb of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan

*Date:* Middle Kingdom, Dynasty 12, Reign of Amenemhat II (c. 1918-1884 BCE)

*Location:* Egypt, Beni Hassan, Upper Cemetery. Tomb of Khnumhotep II (Tomb 3). Chapel. Inscription: East wall, Lower section.

*Parent Context:* Chapel, Autobiography

*Data Credits:* Compiled by Madeline Jenkins and the Beni Hassan Research Group with resources from the Macquarie University Ancient Cultures Research Centre, and the Australian Centre for Egyptology.

*Project Funding:* Supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project scheme: DP160102223 "Measuring meaning in Egyptian art: A new approach to an intractable problem" held by N. Kanawati (MQ), L. Evans (MQ), A. Woods (MQ) and J. Kamrin (Met), the Macquarie University Department of Ancient History, and the Macquarie University Faculty of Arts.

*Original Citation:* N. Kanawati & L. Evans, *Beni Hassan: Volume I: The Tomb of Khnumhotep II* (Australian
Centre for Egyptology: Reports 36, Aris and Phillips, Oxford, ISBN: 978-0-85668-846-1), pls. 07a. (photograph).
Kanawati & Evans, BH1, Pl.110a. (line drawing.).

*Rights:* Recorded and published with permission from the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities. Photographs by Effy Alexakis as part of research on site. Copyright Macquarie University 2018. All rights reserved.

*Cite this:* Madeline Jenkins. "Autobiography of Khnumhotep II on the east wall, lines 1-13, from the tomb of
Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan." In The Beni Hassan Visual Dictionary: Khnumhotep II, edited by Alexandra
Woods, Brian Ballsun-Stanton, and Nicolle Leary. Sydney: Macquarie University, 2018. {{site.baseurl}}{{page.url}}


<!-- src="https://tiles.benihassan.com/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-02a-Beni-Hassan-Khnumhotep-II-Tomb-3-Portico-Architectural-feature-East-wall-Middle-section-Doorway.html" -->