---
layout: post
title: Scroll recording the arrival of a group of foreigners, a detail from the tomb of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan
permalink: /gallery/43a/
tag: Khnumhotep-II
---

## Location

Egypt, Beni Hassan, Upper Cemetery. Tomb of Khnumhotep II (Tomb 3). Chapel. Inscription: East wall, Lower section.

## Description

An Egyptian official described as identified as *sš Ꜥ(w) nswt Nfr-ḥtp* 'the scribe of the royal documents, Noferhotep' bows and presents an unrolled papyrus to the tomb owner, which announces the arrival of a group of Asiatics. This detail occurs in the larger scene of the Asiatic procession on the chapel's north wall. The scroll reads *rnpt-sp 6 ḫr ḥm n Ḥr sšm tꜢwj nswt-bjtj ḪꜤ-ḫpr-RꜤ rḫt n ꜤꜢmw jn.n sꜢ ḥꜢtj-Ꜥ H̱nmw-ḥtp(.w) ḥr msdmt m ꜤꜢmw n Šw rḫt jr 37* 'regnal year 6 under the Majesty of Horus, Leader of the Two Lands, King of Upper and Lower Egypt, Khakheperre (Senwosret II); the number of Asiatics whom the son of the count, Khnumhotep, brought on account of the black eye-paint, namely Asiatics of Shu, number amounting to 37'. A detail of Neferhotep holding the scroll can be seen [here](/gallery/42a).


<amp-accordion>
<section>
<h2>Hieroglyphics</h2>

<amp-img src="/assets/images/MQ.KEBH1.43a.svg"
  width="406"
  height="194"
  layout="responsive"
  class="mb3 mt3"
  alt="AMP"></amp-img>
</section>

<section>
<h2>Details</h2>
<div>
<ul>

<li>*Title:* Scroll recording the arrival of a group of foreigners, a detail from the tomb of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan</li>
<li>*Date:* Middle Kingdom, Dynasty 12, Reign of Amenemhat II (c. 1918-1884 BCE)</li>
<li>*Location:* Egypt, Beni Hassan, Upper Cemetery. Tomb of Khnumhotep II (Tomb 3). Chapel. Scene: North wall, Centre section. Register: 3.</li>
<li>*Parent Context:* Chapel, Autobiography</li>
<li>*Data Credits:* Compiled by Shannon Collis, Penelope Blake, and the Beni Hassan Research Group with resources from the Macquarie University Ancient Cultures Research Centre, and the Australian Centre for Egyptology.</li>
<li>*Project Funding:* Supported by the Australian Research Council Discovery Project scheme: DP160102223 "Measuring meaning in Egyptian art: A new approach to an intractable problem" held by N. Kanawati (MQ), L. Evans (MQ), A. Woods (MQ) and J. Kamrin (Met), the Macquarie University Department of Ancient History, and the Macquarie University Faculty of Arts.</li>
<li>*Original Citation:* N. Kanawati & L. Evans, *Beni Hassan: Volume I: The Tomb of Khnumhotep II* (Australian Centre for Egyptology: Reports 36, Aris and Phillips, Oxford, ISBN: 978-0-85668-846-1), pls. 43a. (photograph). 130c. (line drawing.).</li>
<li>*Rights:* Recorded and published with permission from the Egyptian Ministry of Antiquities. Photographs by Effy Alexakis as part of research on site. Copyright Macquarie University 2018. All rights reserved.</li>
<li>*Cite this:* Shannon Collis. "Scroll announcing the arrival of Asiatic procession, a detail from the tomb of Khnumhotep II at Beni Hassan." In The Beni Hassan Visual Dictionary: Khnumhotep II, edited by Alexandra Woods, Brian Ballsun-Stanton, and Nicolle Leary. Sydney: Macquarie University, 2018." http://benihassan.com{{page.url}}</li>
</ul>
</div>
</section>
</amp-accordion>

## Photograph

<amp-iframe width="600" height="600"
sandbox="allow-scripts allow-presentation allow-popups allow-modals"
layout="responsive"
frameborder="0"
src="https://faims.github.io/tiles/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-43a-Beni-Hassan-3-Khnumhotep-II-Chapel-Scene-North-wall-Centre-section-Wall.html"
>
</amp-iframe>

## Line Art

<amp-iframe width="600" height="600"
sandbox="allow-scripts allow-presentation allow-popups allow-modals"
layout="responsive"
frameborder="0"
src="https://faims.github.io/tiles/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-130c-Beni-Hassan-Khnumhotep-II-Tomb-3-Chapel-Scene-North-wall-Centre-section-WallfromKanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-43a.html"
>
</amp-iframe>


<!-- src="https://tiles.benihassan.com/Kanawati-Evans-BH1-Pl-02a-Beni-Hassan-Khnumhotep-II-Tomb-3-Portico-Architectural-feature-East-wall-Middle-section-Doorway.html" -->